# Hack ToolChain in C# .NET

This repo contains C# .NET implementations of the software projects required in the [nand2tetris](https://www.coursera.org/learn/build-a-computer) course.
Along with an implementation of the JackOS, written in the Jack programming language.

## Hack Assembler in C#

A Hack assembler, wrote in C#, for the [nand2tetris](https://www.coursera.org/learn/build-a-computer) course, project 6.

### Considerations

In line with the ethos of nand2tetris I tried to focus more on simplicity, the assembler contains the minimum amount of error checks
and sanitization and small suite of integration tests. As the assembler itself is designed to run against the given .hack files from the nand2tetris course.

There is also no simple way to represent a 'bit' (0 or 1) in C#, especially fixed size arrays of bits (which would have been useful for the command translations). So I instead opted
to just represent the 'bits' as strings (as this is essentially what they are when written to the .hack file anyway). 

The HackAssembler.Core project could be taken and reused across any project you wish, as this is a .NET 6 class library.

### Installation
Build the HackAssembler project in release mode, you can then use the generated binary like:

`HackAssembler "path/to/asm/file.asm"  "output/directory/path/"`

### Tests

A set of integration tests can be ran that assert the generated .hack machine code file output is equal to
the expected one provided by the nand2tetris course. These are located in the HackAssembler.Core.Tests project.

## VMTranslator in C#

A VM Translator, wrote in C#, for the [nand2tetris](https://www.coursera.org/learn/build-a-computer) course, project 7-8.

### Installation
Build the HackVMTranslator project in release mode, you can then use the generated binary like:

`HackVMTranslator "path/to/vm/file.vm"  "output/directory/path/"`

### Considerations
As this is a learning exercise getting something correct and passing the nand2tetris test files was the main focus,
rather than performance. So there may well be a few bottle necks if you run extremely large .vm files.

### Tests

As the assembly generated can vary greatly but still be a correct translation the integration tests purely checks if the vm file
as converted successfully, it then copies the generated .asm file into the `nand2tetris CPU Emulator Test Files` build directory to be used
by nand2tetris's .tst test files. You then need to use the CPU emulator provided by nand2tetris to run the .tst test files.

So as an example, the `BasicTest.vm` translation test, when running the test in debug mode, would copy the generated .asm file into
`..../Nand2TetrisToolChain/HackVMTranslator.Core.Tests/bin/debug/net6.0/nand2tetris CPU Emulator Test Files/BasicTest.asm`

Not the best solution, but it works well enough to use against their test files which is how they expect you to test the generated .asm files anyway

## Grid Drawer in Jack

In the `GridDrawerInJack` directory there are some Jack files which can be compiled and ran in the VM Emulator. This application draws a grid on the screen and allows the user to move the cursor with the arrow keys and fill cells to create drawings.

## JackToXml in C#

The XML generation portion of the nand2tetris course is completed in the JackToXml projects.
### Considerations

As described in the nand2tetris course, the compiler is wrote ASSUMING the Jack input file is syntactically correct. As a lot more considerations
would need to be added to do error handling gracefully, which is outside the scope of the course. I've added some minor error handling for when the input is
massively off.

This implementation of the XML generator is also not reliant on the XML data format. Instead, the internal data structures, a token list and a parser tree, are able to 
be outputted as XML to run tests that validate the output.

### Tests

Tests for the XML generator can be found in the JackToXml.Core.Tests project. The tests assert that the generated XML
is equivalent to the expected XML files provided by the nand2tetris course, ignoring whitespace.

## Full JackCompiler in C#

The proper compiler can be found in the JackCompiler projects. The JackToXml projects were used as skeleton for the full compiler.
Having them in separate projects make it easier to read through, rather than trying to support both VM code generation and XML generation in the same project

### Considerations

Same above as the JackToXml projects. The compiler output should also be identical to the 
one generated by the official nand2tetris compiler. So the tests assert line by line whether this
compilers generated vm files is equal to the one from the nand2tetris compiler provided
by them.

### Tests

Tests for the XML generator can be found in the JackCompiler.Core.Tests project.

## JackOS

A full implementation of the JackOS .jack standard library files can be found in the 'JackOS/src' directory.
It also contains the suite of tests from the nand2tetris provided tools. The generated .vm files 
when compiled need to be copied over to each test directory to run them on the nand2tetris VMEmulator.

A couple of interesting optimizations where used:
- **Screen.jack** contains some minor drawing optimizations (specifically for horizontal lines). This could 
be further improved.
- **Math.jack** contains optimizations for the division function. The sign of the result is only computed once, and the 
expensive ((q + q) * absY) calculations has instead been replaced by a static int qy2 field that's reset on every division.

Without these various optimizations, and the ones mentioned in the course lectures, the pong game will run incredibly slow.

## JackToHack - End to End .hack Platform Code Generation

The JackToHack project shows how all the generated tools can be plugged together to go from a .jack file to
a .hack machine code file.